- [PARTITION TYPES](#partition-types)
  - [RANGE PARTITIONING](#range-partitioning)
  - [LIST PARTITIONING](#list-partitioning)
  - [HASH PARTITIONING](#hash-partitioning)
  - [COMPOSITE PARTITIONING](#composite-partitioning)
- [MODIFYING PARTITIONS](#modifying-partitioning)
- [MANAGING PARTITIONED DATA](#managing-partitioned-data)
- [INDEXING PARTITIONS](#indexing-partitions)
- [SUBPARTITIONING](#subpartitioning)
- [PARTITION PRUNING](#partition-pruning)

<BR>

Partitioning divides a large table or index into smaller, more manageable pieces, while still maintaining the integrity of the entire dataset. It imporoves performance, maintenance and scalability.

# PARTITION TYPES

### RANGE PARTITIONING
Range partitioning divides data based on a range of values.

```
CREATE TABLE sales (
  id INT,
  sale_date DATE,
  amount DECIMAL
)
PARTITION BY RANGE (YEAR(sales_date)) (
  PARITITON p0 VALUES LESS THAN (2020),
  PARITITON p1 VALUES LESS THAN (2021),
  PARITITON p2 VALUES LESS THAN (2022)
);
```

### LIST PARTITIONING
List partitioning divides data based on a list of discrete values.

```
CREATE TABLE table1(
  id INT,
  column1 VARCHAR(100)
  column2 VARCHAR(100)
)
PARTITION BY LIST (column1) (
  PARTITION p0 VALUES IN (value 1),
  PARTITION p1 VALUES IN (value 2),
  PARTITION p2 VALUES IN (value 3)
);
```


### HASH PARTITIONING
Hash partitionintg distributes data evenly across partitions based on a hash function

```
CREATE TABLE table1 (
  id INT,
  column1 VARCHAR(100)
  column2 VARCHAR(100)
)
PARTITION BY HASH (id) PARTITIONS 4;
```


### COMPOSITE PARTITIONING
Composite partitioning combines two or more partitioning strategies, such as range-has or list-range partitioning.

```
CREATE TABLE orders (
  order_ID INT,
  order_date DATE,
  customer_id INT
)
PARTITION BY RANGE (YEAR(order_date))
  SUBPARTITION BY HASH (customer_id) SUBPARTITIONS 4 (
    PARTITION p0 VALUES LESS THAN (2020),
    PARTITION p1 VALUES LESS THAN (2021)
);
```

# MODIFYING PARTITION

### Adding a Partition

```
ALTER TABLE sales ADD PARTITION (
    PARTITION p3 VALUES LESS THAN (2023)
);
```

### Dropping a Parition

```
ALTER TABLE sales DROP PARTITION p0;
```

# MANAGING PARTITIONED DATA

### Merging Partitions

```
ALTER TABLE sales MERGE PARTITIONS p1, p2 INTO PARTITION p12;
```

### Splitting Partitions

```
ALTER TABLE sales SPLIT PARTITION p12 AT (2021) INTO (
    PARTITION p1, PARTITION p2
);
```

# INDEXING PARTITIONS
Indexes can be created on partitioned tables. Depending on the database, you can have global or local indexes.


### Local Index

```
CREATE INDEX idx_sales_date ON sales (sale_date) LOCAL;
```

### Global Index

```
CREATE INDEX idx_sales_amount ON sales (amount);
```

# SUBPARTITIONING

Subpartitionintg is an additional layer of partitionintg, where partitions are further divided into subpartitions. This helps with even finer-grained data management and can enhance performance, especially when managing large datasets. Subparitioning is typically used in complex schemas, where the first level of partitioning alone may not be sufficient. 

#### TYPES OF SUBPARTITIONING
- **Range-Range**: Both the partition and subpartition are divided by range (ex: dividing a table by year, and then further by month).
- **Range-Hash**: The table is first partitioned by range, and then each range is further subpartitioned by a hash function.
- **List-Hash**: The table is partitioned by a list of values, and then each range is further subpartitioned by a hash function.

```
CREATE TABLE orders (
    order_id INT,
    order_date DATE,
    customer_id INT,
    amount DECIMAL
)
PARTITION BY RANGE (YEAR(order_date))
SUBPARTITION BY HASH (customer_id) SUBPARTITIONS 4 (
    PARTITION p0 VALUES LESS THAN (2021),
    PARTITION p1 VALUES LESS THAN (2022),
    PARTITION p2 VALUES LESS THAN (2023)
);
```

# PARTITION PRUNING

Partition pruning is a performance optimization technique where the database engine only scans relevant partitions based on the query’s filter conditions. This significantly reduces the amount of data read, making queries faster and more efficient.

Use Partition Keys in `WHERE` Clause. To benefit from partition pruning, make sure your query filters on the partition key (e.g., `sale_date` in a range-partitioned table by date). Avoid Functions on Partition Keys, applying functions to partition keys (e.g., YEAR(sale_date) in the `WHERE` clause) can prevent pruning because the engine cannot determine the relevant partition in advance.

```
SELECT * FROM sales WHERE sale_date BETWEEN '2022-01-01' AND '2022-12-31';
```
